ladies and gentlemen as we continue our
program please welcome to the stage
another esteemed member of the CMC batch
of 69 as well as a distinguished leader
of the global medical research community
and professor of medicine Health
Sciences and Technology at Harvard
Medical School Dr shiv Pila
[Applause]
okay so it's a real pleasure and
privilege for me today uh to introduce
someone to you who is one of our you
know special guests tonight and uh so
this is a person who is a physician a
practicing oncologist an academic uh
oncologist who an associate professor at
Columbia University he's a
scientist he's quite a renowned writer
and he's also a gifted musician okay and
so his story is quite fascinating for
most people and maybe we'll hear more
from him in a few minutes but uh
somewhere along the way growing up in
Delhi uh as a young boy he thought about
going out to a college in the US for his
undergraduate education he ended up in
Stanford so this is Dr sidharta mukui
I'm talking about right now and uh he
left went to Stanford in
1989 uh was clearly an outstanding
student uh he got many honors he did he
actually did research with one of the
pioneers of I would say one of the
creators of modern molecular biology uh
at
Stanford uh he was then awarded a road
scholarship he went out to Oxford and
for his def he worked with again a
physician scientist
Alan Townson who had been one of the
people who started the field of
understanding how the immune system
recognizes stuff out there when you're
thinking of you know any recognition
event that leads to clearance of a
pathogen or clearance of a tumor uh this
is where it all started from uh in when
he was doing his Dill some of his work
addressed
issues okay issues related to how tumor
antigens are recognized by the immune
system and I think that was perhaps the
beginning of his maybe he'll tell us
more about this it was interes in cancer
uh after his roads he came to Boston in
1995 uh he was a an MD student in the
HST program at Harvard Medical School
which is perhaps the most science
oriented medical school program anywhere
it's a track within Harvard Medical
School and uh he did more more research
as a student he had quite a remarkable
MD thesis which I'll try to get to later
on in our
conversation and uh he then trained
after that in Internal Medicine at
masteral hospital continued to do
research as a physician at masteral
hospital uh he worked with a renowned
cell biologist and a stem cell biologist
and oncologist that's David scadden made
some very important discoveries about
stem cells and the bone and the origins
of myoid cancers and it wasn't a
surprise when this young star in the
making was recruited by Colombia
University as an assistant assistant
professor around
2009 so when he was in Boston I think
what we didn't quite realize that some
other interesting things must have been
going on uh we now know that this is
where he you know found his wife who is
uh you know has a reputation of her own
very standing in in the field of the
Arts and uh he also was doing something
that nobody knew about certainly his
mentor who I'm a good friend of us
didn't know about and then 2010 we saw
this amazing book come out which most of
us read which you know within a few
months I was putting it on the list for
Howard undergrads to read for science
books and this is the book The Emperor
of all maladies it's one of the most
lucidly written books about science and
medicine it brings together a wealth of
information if those of you who haven't
read it you should read it uh so it's no
surprise that the very next year he got
a pulit
surprise in 2014 I think the government
of India awarded him a padmashri and at
Colombia he continued to do some
groundbreaking work on stem cells in the
bone and his lab has now taken a very uh
translational turn he's doing some
amazing therapies that maybe he'll tell
you a little bit about about of treating
myoid malignancies and he also has a
large footprint in India so he actually
has been to weor and some of his work so
like you heard about the car cell
therapy some of that comes from his
efforts in India so with that I want to
inform everybody that uh Dr sidharta
mukui is the first recipient of the Ida
S Scutter Socratic leadership award
I didn't come up with the name and I'm
going to call him up to receive this
award we need a
second thank you very
much I put this down over here yeah you
put that
down Okay so so uh just a brief
conversation I think we would
be many people in the room who grew up
in India would be intrigued to know how
somebody with some incredible talents so
you were you know gifted as a musician
you had lots of interests in India and
then somewhere somewhere along the way
you thought maybe you want to go into
your undergraduate education somewhere
in America and then I don't know when
you actually got interested in medicine
and science I mean clearly you were
interested in science you must have read
widely to have gone to Stanford maybe
you'll tell us a little bit about that
stage of your life and how your story
began it'll just be of C curiosity and
interest to everybody sure I mean let's
make this really interest interesting
because um we have a short we have just
a little bit of time um I'm going to
tell you lots of things that I haven't
told most people um just for fun uh
um so the first thing I'm going to tell
you is that as when I was growing up as
a child
um I and very virtually never no one
knows this but I thought that I would be
a
musician and I had no other thing that I
had imagined that I would do aside from
being a musician um and then um a series
of important things happened in my life
um so in Indian music in Indian
classical music particularly you go
through a training and there are seniors
Beyond above you and behind you Juniors
behind you seniors in front of you and
it happened to be that I was
sandwiched between two of the In My
School of Music My Gana I was sandwiched
between and virtually no one knows this
I was sandwiched between two of the
greatest musicians that India would
produce in front of me was uh Rashid
Khan um who unfortunately passed away
last year um and behind me is a Young
musician Saras hus Khan who um is coming
up as a musician now that's a little bit
like um being um uh a tennis player uh
you know and having Roger ferer in
behind you and um and um I'm trying to
think of the the right name Rod lab and
Rod labor in in front of you um so I
quickly realized that I wouldn't be a
musician I switched just in the nick of
time and decided that I would in fact go
to you know pursue the Sciences so I'm
an accidental scientist I have to say
you know my um I I I I still um I I
still think of the time that that I
wanted to be a full-time musician but I
I I grew into the Sciences accidentally
and that's how I ended up at Stanford so
but there's so much passion in your
books yes it's about the science passion
for medicine passion for you know the
patients you treated your family members
so where did this medicine Interest
really come from when did it start so I
I I came backwards into medicine um you
know I started
and and these events are are kind of
important because they Mark sort of
timelines in my life at Stanford I um
started off again I had no idea what I
was going to do um and I knocked on Paul
Berg's lab I was the first undergraduate
that Paul um took into his laboratory
Paul is a very important figure in my
life um Paul passed away again Paul also
passed away last year it's a big moment
in my life but um Paul had um for people
who don't know Paul's work um Paul had
done probably one of the most important
experiments of the 20th century in
molecular biology which is that he had
he was already a highly established
scientist but in the middle of all of
this Paul had done an experiment which
really revolutionized molecular biology
he had taken two pieces of DNA from two
different organisms cut them using enzy
enzymes and then pasted them together it
was a cut and paste event and then
created a new piece of DNA which
contained DNA from two different
organisms people didn't people had
thought about this as a possibility but
Paul did it as a reality and showed that
in fact because this molecule was the
universal or contained the universal
genetic code that in fact it was
recognized as universal that that it was
recognized as if it was one piece
and with if introduced back into a
bacterium or into the human cell or into
a body even there was nothing that the
body said that oh gosh you know that
piece is from a bacterium that's from a
virus that's from a giraffe that's from
a zebra that's from a human it all it
all all came together it was one piece
of DNA this technology was called
recombinant DNA as you know very well
but some people may not know but
recombinant DNA and it began the
molecular biology Revolution because all
of a sudden you could think about taking
one gene from one organism or one human
being and putting it into another human
being and then thereby making it you
know making it a language almost in that
that you could translate from one to the
other but Paul did one more thing that
was important and that was very crucial
to my life Paul recognized that the
origins of such a technology recommon in
DNA was the or origin or would would be
the origin of something both miraculous
technologically but also ethically
complicated because all of a sudden on
one hand there were bios safety concerns
what if you put a piece of a toxic piece
you know something that made a bacterial
or viral Toxin and you put it and you
introduced it into a human being now you
would have that recognized as a piece of
normal tissue and and and extruding the
toxin
so there were some bios safety concerns
and then very into the very distant
future were some ethical concerns you
know what about gene therapy who what
would be how could we replace genes what
would be considered normal what would be
considered pathological what was the
definition or the boundaries of normal
versus pathological and even as early in
as the late 1970s early
1980s Paul began to wrestle with these
questions not not only about biosafety
but about these questions about what is
normal what is pathological where do we
draw the lines in recom and DNA Etc and
he organized two conferences and it's
very very important for us to realize
and and and recall these conferences as
we move forward into an era which we'll
talk about of AI and other um Arenas he
organized two conferences one called AAR
1 which was organized in in California
in a in a beautiful Retreat Center
called aamar ayar 1 was about bios
safety ayar 2 was an even more
Progressive and even more uh um I would
say uh Landmark a landmark conference in
which he invited along with David
Baltimore who you and I both know
together um and other great scientist
Maxine singer um he invited a group of
uh not just scientists but uh but legal
Scholars ethical Scholars uh political
Scholars journalists and an incredible
audience of people to come and remark
and give feedback about this new
technology of genetic engineering
recommon and DNA that he and others were
bringing into the world and the result
of this conference was and this is
really important the result of this
conference was an NIH imposed moratorium
on the use and the um movement on
research on recom DNA before some of
these ethical issues could be sorted out
and in fact these ethical issues were
sorted out many people commented on them
some kinds of experiments were forbidden
some kinds of experiments were
considered uh enabling and and so forth
and the reason I went to Paul as an
undergraduate as a first year
undergraduate with great reputation was
because I had an
instinct that medicine and biology was
going to
intersect very deeply with ethical and
uh social and cultural
concerns and Paul had was the one person
was the northern light for me and had
been and has been and will be the
northern light for me for someone who
has been able to really think about not
only the scientific but also the ethical
concerns so there was a very directed
way in which I approached Paul I just
didn't go randomly into his office I
wandered into his office with a very
directed um question about how to think
about not just science but the public U
impact of Science and what we could or
could not do to communicate that impact
and what we could or could not do to
have a dialogue with the broader public
in common language about the great
scientific advances that that we were
going through so that's the kind of
quick background as to how I got into
the field of medicine through really the
work of Paul and through science okay so
I have a question to ask you it's so
I've actually read he's written four
books I haven't read one of them i' read
three of them and they're all brilliant
and worth reading if you just like like
to read you know anything written in the
English language which is so lucid and
you know helps you understand things
these are amazing books but I heard when
you know I look at some of the thesis so
he was in a program where every MD
student has to write a thesis you know
he already had a dill but he still had
to write an MD thesis and the Rumor I've
heard and you know I've actually not
read his MD thesis but it got tremendous
accolades from the two reviewers who
talked about it and I believe it is the
longest MD thesis in the history of the
HST program okay and uh someone told me
that it's it's almost like a history of
medicine that came out at that time so
I'm wondering whether this is back in
around 1997 98 when you're doing this
was this the beginning of maybe the
Emperor of all maladies or you know just
think over the story no one knows this
I'm glad you Dr it up but um yes that
was the beginning of Emperor W Melodies
so in writing that thesis um my my
medical MD thesis I began to ask the
question why does a medical
thesis um not act as a philosophical
document um why is it a merely a quote
unquote scientific document and what if
we spent our our time in medicine in in
my case as an MD student not just
thinking about sort of the experiments
I'd done or the the minor things that i'
done in in in medicine but thinking
about the large connecting the work that
i' done with the larger with the longer
and larger history and that was the
basis so my MD thesis my medical thesis
begins with a consideration of the
origins of cancer
um in deep history and continues onwards
from there so when I started writing my
thesis I sat myself down in the library
and I said you know what I'm going to
write a thesis which is going to be very
long obviously but I'm going to write a
thesis in which I'm going to begin to
track and understand where I came from
my own story my own origin story and
that's the beginning of my medical
thesis that's a great story I have to go
read the thesis it's sitting somewhere
in our libraries uh so maybe I'll end
with so you've done you know your lab
continues to do exciting work you have
some novel myoid therapies
immunotherapies that are coming out
which uh you know could help cure maybe
cure acute myo leukemia we hope but you
also do a lot of work in India and a lot
of it is based on you know combining
entrepreneurial approaches with helping
people elsewhere so maybe you want to
choose whatever you want to talk about
but maybe maybe you want to tell us
something about your work maybe how it
connects with people in India and how it
might help people elsewhere and maybe we
can end with that great well first of
all sh thank you for inviting me I'm a
big fan of uh CMC so I want to
congratulate everyone who's either
graduate of the institution or is
connected with the institution it's a
you are U you do an enormous Public
Service um to India um I'll give you two
instances of things we've done um one is
that the C the one of the things that
we've created is that I've I'm the
founder of um one of the two companies
in India that is that has made kti
Therapies in India um the one that I
founded is called imun um it is based in
Bangalore um we make we are actually uh
uh different from um other companies in
the sense that we make our own we have
created a fully integrated uh G MP
facility including we make our own
lentivirus in India so we make an
endtoend production of an autologous uh
therapy in India and it's priced at as
someone said at about 1110th the price
of the United States we're trying to get
to 12th and the Gates Foundation
recently challenged us and asked us to
get to
150th of the of the costs of therapy in
India um we have now cured I use the
word cured um we've now cured I think
about 30 children with acute
lymphoblastic Leukemia and Lymphoma in
India um those patients who were
treated on trial um so that was all free
of cost that was all done completely
free um we have a program that we will
soon announce in which we will uh enable
one in five patients to be treated uh
again free of cost um uh through a a
program that we have uh which we are
initiating
so so um uh we are bringing novel CTI
programs and uh one thing that I want to
emphasize is that a large part of our
program that we started in India which
has been recognized in multiple
abstracts and and and articles in major
Publications is that we don't want to be
fast followers we want to be leaders um
so we have a a rich pipeline which
involves rare diseases beta phemia CLE
Cel anemia and in all cases we issue
challenges to ourselves and we follow
through with those challenges and create
new therapies which actually then come
back into the West um in fact our
integrated system for lentivirus cartis
cell production at on10th the cost is
now being resourced back into the west
by um funds like arpa H because they're
asking the question why are we paying
$500,000 when India can produce the same
quality product product for 50,000 um
that's one example of what we do the
second initiative then I'll and then we
can stop and if there I'm happy to talk
more answer questions whatever we want
to do but um the second initiative is um
has not really been publicly announced
again I said I'll do things for fun here
um uh but the but U Gates Ventures Reed
Hoffman and I uh have U are just
announcing a new uh
uh program which I will take over as the
uh director of um the CEO of um it's a
company called Manis and its mandate is
to use AI to discover drugs so um we
have written already um a whole Suite
not just one but an entire Suite of
Novel programs um that use AI to screen
uh 10 billion to to 100 billion
molecules in silico uh um to find new
medicines uh for various
diseases um obviously we are interested
given my background in cancer but we
have a
major interest and a major initiative
ongoing in global diseases of which I
will highlight two examples one of them
being CLE cell and beta
thymia um we think I think that it's a
it's a complete um uh I would say uh um
it is it's an impossibility to
imagine uh giving uh therapies such as
cgvi um which costs $2.2 million uh or
$1.8 million some absurd number like
that in India we're actually creating
our own variations of that um which we
will probably we will try to bring down
to the order of 20 to
$50,000 um and perhaps even less and
number two is we also focusing on
diseases such as drug resistant
tuberculosis um uh where the molecule
responsible for drug resistance now has
been
identified um we can now model that and
we can now dock in silico uh 10 to uh
100 billion uh lians or molecules into
that and try to find a new drug against
that and of course we would love to
bring these trials not only to Bangalore
but of course to CMC which is a Medical
Center for our concerns so those are two
flavors of the kinds of things that
we're doing in the future Sid I think I
speak for everybody in this room that we
really think it's a privilege to have
you here with us and to hear from you
and thank you once again for coming and
joining us it's been
[Applause]